[Illustration: ADVANCE OF GENERAL KEARNEY INTO CALIFORNIA.]




  STORIES
  OF THE
  WAR OF 1812,
  AND THE
  MEXICAN WAR.

  WITH NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS.

  PHILADELPHIA:
  W. A. LEARY & Co.
  No. 138 NORTH SECOND ST.
  1854.




  Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1851, by

  J. & J. L. GIHON,

  In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States,
  in and for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.




PREFACE.


The following pages contain a collection of Stories of the War of 1812,
with Great Britain; and of the Recent War, with the Republic of Mexico.

Rightly considered, the first of these national wars was a supplement
to the glorious War of Independence. Up to the time when our government
boldly threw down the gauntlet of defiance to the most powerful nation
of Europe, in defence of Free Trade and Sailor’s Rights, the British
nation regarded us as revolted subjects, successful for the moment, but
destined always to be governed by British influence and ultimately to
be reconquered.

The events of the second war with Great Britain finished what the first
had begun, and set the seal on our Independence. From the period of its
conclusion, our flag was respected by Britain and all other nations.
Our naval prowess was recognized as a fixed fact.

The recent war with Mexico has taught the world another lesson. It has
shown that with a standing army of very few men, and a good militia
system, the republic is capable of raising large and efficient armies,
and conquering a military republic, of immense population, wealth,
and resources, possessing a powerful standing army; accustomed, in
consequence of the distracted state of the country, to frequent action
and constant discipline.

The wars which teach these lessons are worthy the attention of the
youth of our country; and we have endeavored to render these stories of
the wars sufficiently attractive to win that degree of attention and
interest which will insure a future study of American history.




[Illustration: DETROIT.]

THE WAR OF 1812.

SURRENDER OF DETROIT.


In June, 1812, the United States declared war against Great Britain.
The chief cause of the war was the impressment of American seamen by
the British. General Hull, with twenty-five hundred men, took post at
Detroit, in Michigan. Soon afterward, the British general, Brock, with
thirteen hundred men, appeared before Detroit, erected batteries, and
summoned Hull to surrender. He refused, and the British opened their
fire upon the works. On the 26th, they crossed the river and moved
forward to the attack. The American troops were prepared to receive
them, and eager for the conflict. But as the British approached, Hull
ordered his men to retire into the fort, and hoisted a white flag. In a
short time, terms of surrender were agreed upon, and the whole American
army, with all its ammunition and stores were given up to the British.
This surrender excited the indignation of the people. Hull was accused
of cowardice, tried by a court martial, and sentenced to be shot. The
President, however, in consideration of his age and services, remitted
the punishment, but ordered his name to be stricken from the rolls of
the army.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF QUEENSTOWN.]

BATTLE OF QUEENSTOWN.


Early in October, 1812, about three thousand five hundred men, under
command of General Van Rensselaer, were assembled on the Niagara
frontier. General Van Rensselaer resolved to make an attack on the
British position at Queenstown, eight miles below Niagara Falls. At
daybreak on the 13th of October, the troops began to embark to cross
the river. The British opened a fire upon them, which was returned by
the American batteries. Colonel Van Rensselaer, with about one hundred
men, reached the shore, and stormed the fort of the British, though
not without severe loss. The Americans drove the enemy from the field,
and the victory was supposed to be gained, when another reinforcement
arrived, and the conflict was renewed. At this critical moment, General
Van Rensselaer crossed the river to bring a reinforcement for his
gallant little band, and found that the militia would not obey his
orders. Colonel Christie maintained the fight on the opposite shore,
against overwhelming numbers, until seeing no hope of relief, he
surrendered the remnant of his force. The Americans lost one thousand
men in all, in this battle. The loss of the enemy was somewhat less,
but their noble commander, the gallant Brock, was slain.




[Illustration: DEFENCE OF FORT HARRISON.]

DEFENCE OF FORT HARRISON.


Fort Harrison was a post on the Wabash river, in the heart of the
Indian country. It consisted of two blockhouses, stockade works, and
a few buildings for stores or magazines. In September 1812, sixteen
men, under the command of Captain Zachary Taylor, formed the garrison
of this post. On the 3d of September, two men, who were working in the
field near it, were murdered by the Indians, and on the night of the
4th, the savages set fire to one of the blockhouses, and commenced an
assault. Captain Taylor, though suffering from sickness displayed
the greatest coolness and resolution. Two of his men leaped over the
stockade and fled, and the others were seized with a panic. But he
restored their hopes, and by tearing off the roof of the barracks,
and other means, succeeded in quenching the fire. The savages poured
a steady fire into the fort. The invalids of the garrison returned
it, and the conflict was fierce and desperate until daybreak, when
the enemy retreated beyond the reach of the fort. They beleaguered
the garrison, however, for twelve days, when a large body of troops
arrived, and forced them to raise the siege.




[Illustration: CAPTURE OF THE GUERRIERE.]

[Illustration: COMMODORE HULL.]

CAPTURE OF THE GUERRIERE.


At the commencement of the war, the navy of Great Britain was looked
upon as invincible. But an important victory changed the opinion of
the people of the United States. The frigate Constitution, commanded
by Captain Isaac Hull, sailed from Annapolis on the 25th of July,
1812, for New York. Falling in with a British fleet, she only escaped
by great skill and seamanship. Soon after she sailed from Boston, and
on the 19th of August encountered the British frigate, Guerriere,
commanded by Captain Dacres. A fierce conflict of about half an hour’s
length ensued. The Guerriere was reduced to a wreck, and after her
surrender, burned. In this action the Americans had seven men killed,
and seven wounded. The British loss was fifteen killed, sixty-two
wounded, and twenty-four missing. The effect of this victory was
to give the Americans confidence in the skill and bravery of their
seamen.




[Illustration: CAPTURE OF THE FROLIC.]

CAPTURE OF THE FROLIC.


The United States sloop-of-war Wasp, of eighteen guns, commanded by
Captain Jacob Jones, sailed from the Delaware, on the 13th of October;
and on the 18th of the month, after a long and heavy gale, fell in with
a convoy of six merchantmen, four of them strongly armed, under the
protection of His Britannic Majesty sloop-of-war Frolic, of twenty-two
guns, Captain Whinyates. At half-past eleven in the morning, the
action commenced at the distance of about fifty yards. But, during
the action, so near did they come to each other, that the rammers of
the Wasp’s cannon struck against the side of the Frolic. The fire of
the English vessel soon slackened; and after a most sanguinary action
of forty-three minutes, every brace of the Wasp being shot away, and
the rigging so much torn, that Captain Jones resolved to board the
enemy. With this view he wore ship and running down upon the enemy, the
vessels struck. The officers surrendered the vessel, and the colors
were hauled down by Lieutenant Biddle. The Frolic was in a shocking
condition; the berth-deck was filled with dead and wounded. No sooner
had the engagement ceased, than the British ship, Poictiers, of seventy
four guns, came up, and captured both vessels.




[Illustration: DEATH OF GENERAL PIKE.]

ATTACK ON YORK.


General Dearborn, the commander of the United States forces on the
Ontario frontier, having resolved to attack York, the capital of Upper
Canada, embarked seventeen hundred troops, and left Sackett’s Harbor
on the 25th of April. On the 27th, the troops, under the command of
General Pike, effected a landing and drove a much superior force of
the enemy from the shore. But they returned to the attack, and the
contest was renewed. The enemy were again defeated and driven to their
works. The whole force of the Americans having reached the shore, and
being arranged in the order for attack, General Pike pressed forward,
carried one of the enemy’s batteries, and was moving towards the main
works, when a sudden and tremendous explosion of the magazine occurred,
hurling upon the advancing troops immense masses of stone and timber,
and for a time checking them by the havoc it made. General Pike was
mortally wounded. But the troops under command of Colonel Pearce,
pressed on, and captured the town, with all the land and naval forces
in and about it. The total loss of the Americans was three hundred and
twenty men. General Pike was greatly lamented. The British loss was
four hundred killed or wounded, and three hundred prisoners.




[Illustration: CAPTURE OF FORT GEORGE.]

CAPTURE OF FORT GEORGE.


After the capture of York, General Dearborn resolved to attempt the
capture of Fort George. On the morning of the 27th of May, the light
troops under Colonel Scott and Major Forsyth, supported by Colonel
Porter’s light artillery and General Lewis’s division, crossed the
Niagara river, and attacked the fort. Other brigades of troops
followed. Commodore Chauncey had made judicious arrangements with
his small ships, to silence the enemy’s batteries at the point of
landing. The descent was warmly contested at the water’s edge, by the
British; but they were soon compelled to give way, and the landing
was completed. The American batteries soon succeeded in rendering the
fort untenable. The British, retiring from the banks of the river,
re-entered the fort, fired a few shot, set fire to the magazine, and
then moved off in different directions. Of the British regular troops,
ninety were killed, one hundred and sixty wounded, and one hundred
captured. The Americans lost seventeen killed, and sixty wounded.

[Illustration: FORT GEORGE.]




[Illustration: DEFENCE OF SACKETT’S HARBOR.]

DEFENCE OF SACKETT’S HARBOR.


To retaliate for the capture of York, Sir George Prevost, the British
general-in-chief, determined to make a descent on Sackett’s Harbor, the
chief American depot for stores, on the lakes. Accordingly, on the 27th
of May, 1813, Prevost, with nearly a thousand men, embarked in small
boats, and proceeded, under convoy of the British fleet. The fleet
being seen on the lake, preparations were made for the defence of the
post. General Brown, with six hundred militia, came to the aid of the
few regular troops, and made wise disposition for the reception of
the enemy. Prevost arrived, and commenced the attack on the evening of
the 28th. The first line of the militia fired, and then gave way. But
Brown, with the rest of his troops, maintained his ground against the
assault, and poured such a well aimed fire into the enemy, that they
were checked. The success was followed up, and at length, the British
were driven to their boats. Through some mistake the American stores
were burned by the officer set to guard them. This victory brought the
military talents of General Brown to light.




[Illustration: DEFENCE OF FORT STEPHENSON.]

DEFENCE OF FORT STEPHENSON.


The defence of Fort Stephenson, at Lower Sandusky, was one of the most
brilliant exploits in the annals of war. It was an unfinished stockade
fort, garrisoned by one hundred and fifty men, under the command of
Major George Croghan. General Harrison had sent word to the major, that
he should abandon the fort on the approach of the enemy. But he did
not think a retreat possible, and, moreover, was determined to perish,
rather than surrender. On the 28th of May, Proctor, with twenty-two
hundred British and Indians, appeared before the fort, and summoned
the garrison to surrender. Receiving the most heroic refusal, he opened
a heavy fire, which was continued during the night and all next day,
when the enemy advanced to the assault. Croghan had but one six-pounder
in the fort. This was masked, and other preparations made to receive
the foe. The assault was furious, but the fire of the heroic garrison
committed such havoc that the British were compelled to fall back in
confusion, and soon after they abandoned the siege, having lost over
two hundred men. Croghan’s loss was trifling.




[Illustration: BUILDING THE FLEET ON LAKE ERIE.]

[Illustration: COMMODORE PERRY.]

BUILDING OF THE FLEET ON LAKE ERIE.


Early in the spring of 1813, the attention of the government of the
United States, was directed to the important object of obtaining the
command of Lake Erie. The earnest representations of General Harrison
had awakened the administration to a proper sense of the necessity of
this measure. The British already had an efficient naval force upon
the lake, and it gave them great advantages. Two brigs and several
schooners were ordered to be built, under the direction of Captain
Oliver H. Perry. That able and active officer saw that the work was
carried on with the greatest rapidity, and on the 2d of August, he was
able to sail in quest of the enemy’s squadron. The British, though much
superior in force, did not venture out to meet the new squadron.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF LAKE ERIE.]

BATTLE OF LAKE ERIE.


On the morning of the 10th of September, while Perry’s squadron was
lying in Put-in-bay, in Bass Island, the enemy’s fleet was discovered
standing out from the port of Malden, with the wind in their favor.
The American fleet immediately weighed anchor, cleared the islands
at the head of the lake, and was formed in line of battle. A little
before twelve o’clock, the action commenced, the British having the
weathergage. For some time, the fire of the enemy was concentrated upon
the St. Lawrence, Perry’s flag-ship, and she was much cut up, most
of her crew killed or wounded, and her guns disabled. In the midst
of the lire, Captain Perry passed in an open boat from the Lawrence
to the Niagara, and succeeded in bringing the rest of his fleet into
action. A well directed fire was then opened upon the enemy, and the
battle then became close and warm. At length the British vessels having
suffered severely from the superior gunnery of the Americans, struck
their colors. The Lawrence, whose flag had been hauled down soon after
Perry had left her, had been enabled to hoist it before the end of
the contest, the enemy not being able to take possession of her. The
American loss was twenty-five killed, and ninety-six wounded; that of
the enemy, forty-one killed, and ninety-five wounded.




[Illustration: HARRISON CROSSING LAKE ERIE.]

BATTLE OF THE THAMES.


As soon as General Harrison received the news of the triumph on Lake
Erie, he hastened to put his army in motion to meet Proctor. Crossing
the Lake, by means of Perry’s victorious squadron, he reached Malden,
which the British and Indians had abandoned the day before. On the
2d of October, Harrison moved forward in pursuit of the enemy, and
on the 5th, came up with them, at a strong position on the banks of
the Thames. The Indians, under Tecumseh, were placed in a dense wood,
while the British regulars were drawn up in open files, their flanks
protected by the river and a morass. Colonel Johnson, with the mounted
volunteers, was ordered to attack the Indians, while Harrison formed
another battalion of the same troops, and ordered them to charge and
break the line of regulars. This novel manœuvre was executed with
complete success. The British force was compelled to surrender. The
Indians maintained a desperate contest until the great Tecumseh was
slain, when they broke and fled. This victory was decisive. Very few
were killed and wounded on both sides, but the enemy were entirely
captured or dispersed.




[Illustration: CAPTURE OF THE BOXER.]

CAPTURE OF THE BOXER.


On the 5th of September, 1813, the United States brig Enterprize,
of fourteen guns, commanded by Lieutenant Burrows, sailed from
Portsmouth, and the next day fell in with the British brig, Boxer, of
fourteen guns, commanded by Captain Blythe. The latter immediately
fired a shot as a challenge, hoisted English colors, and bore down on
the Enterprize. The American vessel manœuvered until she gained the
weathergage, and then returned the fire. Obtaining a raking position,
the Enterprize soon gained the advantage, and after an action of three
quarters of an hour, compelled the British to cry for quarter. Their
colors were nailed to the mast, but the firing ceased. Captain Blythe
and Lieutenant Burrows were mortally wounded in the early part of the
action. Burrows refused to be carried below until the sword of the
enemy was presented to him, when he exclaimed, “I am now satisfied--I
die contented.” The Boxer had twenty-five men killed, and fourteen
wounded. The Enterprize had four men killed, and eleven wounded.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF LUNDY’S LANE.]

[Illustration]

BATTLE OF LUNDY’S LANE.


The battle of Lundy’s Lane was the best contested action of the war
of 1812. On the afternoon of the 24th of July, 1814, General Brown
received a notice that the British general had thrown a thousand men
across the lake to Lewistown, nine miles below Chippewa. To divert them
from what he supposed to be their object, the American general ordered
General Winfield Scott, with his brigade of thirteen hundred men, to
advance and threaten the forts at the mouth of the Niagara. Scott,
advancing more than two miles, suddenly found himself in front of the
whole British army, drawn up in Lundy’s Lane. Undaunted, he formed
his line, and the struggle began. For two hours, the fiercest and the
most desperate valor was displayed on both sides. Every attempt of the
British to turn the flanks of the gallant band opposed to them failed.
Their own left was turned and cut off, but their centre stood firm.
Night came on, and the struggle was continued solely by the flashes of
the guns. The American line had suffered much, but the remnants
of the troops stood their ground with indomitable resolution. About
ten o’clock the ammunition of the troops began to fail. But General
Brown at length came up with strong reinforcements, and relieved the
exhausted men. A more equal fight now ensued. Brown determined to carry
the battery on the height at the head of the lane, that being the key
of the enemy’s position. Riding up to Colonel Miller, he asked him if
he would storm the height.

[Illustration: SCOTT PILOTING MILLER.]

“I will try, sir!” was the heroic reply. Piloted by Scott, through
the darkness to the foot of the ascent, Miller seized the guns almost
instantaneously. Meanwhile General Ripley engaged the enemy, and was
supported by the gallant Scott, who had two horses shot under him,
and was wounded in the side, but kept the field until a wound in the
shoulder brought him to the ground. General Brown was severely wounded,
and, with Scott, taken from the field. The command now devolved on
General Ripley. But the battle was nearly over. The British made one
more charge, and were repulsed in disorder, and then the firing ceased.
Ripley retired to the camp at Chippewa. In this bloody and well fought
battle, the Americans lost eight hundred and sixty men, killed and
wounded. The loss of the enemy was about one thousand men. One of their
generals, Riall, was captured.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF LAKE CHAMPLAIN.]

BATTLE OF LAKE CHAMPLAIN.


The British were very anxious to obtain the command of Lake Champlain,
and the posts in the vicinity. The Americans had fitted out a small
squadron on the lake, and placed it under the command of Commodore
Macdonough. In 1814, a powerful British army advanced against
Plattsburgh, and a British squadron, commanded by Captain Downie,
sailed to meet the American squadron, then lying in Plattsburgh bay.
Early on the morning of the 11th of September, the fleets met, and the
battle commenced.

The Confiance, the flag-ship of the enemy, engaged the Saratoga, and
the contest was maintained for about two hours, when the Confiance
struck her colors. The chief vessel of the enemy being captured, the
brig surrendered in a few minutes; two sloops had been captured some
time before; three of the gallies were sunk, and the others escaped.
The killed on board the American squadron amounted to fifty-two,
the wounded to fifty-eight. Of the enemy, eighty-four were killed,
including Captain Downie, the commander of the squadron, one hundred
and ten wounded, and eight hundred and fifty-six remained prisoners, a
number exceeding the whole amount of the Americans engaged.




[Illustration: DEFENCE OF FORT M’HENRY.]

DEFENCE OF FORT M’HENRY.


The success of the attack on Washington encouraged the British general,
Ross, to undertake an expedition against another city. Baltimore was
the object of attack. The approach to that city by water was defended
by Fort M’Henry, garrisoned by one thousand men, under Major Armistead;
and by other temporary works. On the 11th of September, Admiral
Cochrane appeared at the mouth of the Patapsco, with a squadron of
fifty sail, and a strong body of British troops was landed at North
Point, about fourteen miles below Baltimore. At sunrise, on the 13th,
the bombardment of the fort commenced. The bomb vessels of the enemy
were stationed about two miles from the fort, and were consequently
beyond the reach of its guns. Though compelled to remain inactive, the
troops in the fort were steadfast to their posts. The bursting of a
shell within the southwest bastion creating some confusion, the ships
of the enemy attempted to profit by it, but they were soon compelled
to retreat to their former stations, where they continued a tremendous
bombardment until the morning of the 14th. During the night, some
barges and rocket vessels succeeded in passing the fort, but they were
driven back with severe loss, by the fire from the smaller works.




BATTLE OF NEW ORLEANS.


In the latter part of 1814, information being received that the British
intended to make a descent on Louisiana, General Jackson hastened to
New Orleans, and made preparations for its defence. Every approach
to the town was guarded by batteries and gunboats. The British fleet
arrived early in December, and on the 14th, an attack was made upon
the American gunboats on Lake Borgne. After a desperate contest,
they submitted to a much superior force. The British having gained a
position on the banks of the Mississippi, General Jackson, with two
thousand men, marched down, on the evening of the 23d, and attacked
them. After a hot fight, in which the enemy lost over two hundred men,
the Americans fell back to their lines. Both armies having received
large reinforcements, the British on the 8th of January, moved to
the assault. The Americans drove them back in confusion. Sir Edward
Packenham was killed. Again the enemy attempted to scale the work, and
were again driven back. At length all the chief commanding officers
being killed or disabled, the British retreated. Their loss in this
battle was two hundred and ninety-three killed, twelve hundred and
sixty-seven wounded, and four hundred and eighty-four prisoners. The
American loss was only thirteen killed, and thirty-seven wounded.




CONCLUSION OF THE WAR WITH GREAT BRITAIN.


The battle of New Orleans was the last great military event of the
second war with Great Britain. In point of fact, it was fought after a
treaty had been signed by the commissioners of Great Britain and the
United States, assembled for the purpose at Ghent. This battle was of
immense importance. It saved the city of New Orleans from capture and
plunder. General Jackson’s services on this occasion, and his difficult
and perilous campaign against the Creek Indians, raised his reputation
to a very high point; and subsequently occasioned his elevation to the
president’s chair.

After the conclusion of the treaty of Ghent, a squadron of the United
States navy was sent to chastise the Barbary powers for attacking
our commerce during the war with Great Britain. The Barbary powers
concluded treaties without a struggle, and the country, except a few
skirmishes with the Indians, remained at peace till the war with
Mexico, of which we will now proceed to give some sketches.

[Illustration: DEATH OF RINGGOLD.]




[Illustration]

THE MEXICAN WAR.

BATTLE OF PALO ALTO.


In the course of the year 1845, the government of the United States
ordered General Taylor, with about three thousand men, to take
possession of the country lying between the Nueces and the Rio Grande,
which country was the subject of dispute between the governments of
Mexico and Texas. General Taylor reached the Rio Grande, in April,
1846. Now, the Mexican government looked upon this movement as a
trespass upon their territory, and therefore declared war. Leaving a
small force to occupy Fort Polk, opposite Matamoras, General Taylor,
with the main body of his army, marched to Point Isabel, at the mouth
of the Rio Grande. Soon after, he heard that the Mexicans had commenced
to bombard Fort Polk, and that General Arista, with a large body of
troops, had crossed the river. There was great difference in the
strength of the two armies, but General Taylor was a very determined
man, and he said he would go and relieve Fort Polk, and fight whoever
opposed him. He started on the morning of the 7th of May, and about two
o’clock the next day, encountered the Mexicans at Palo Alto. A dreadful
battle was then fought. The Mexicans were much more numerous than the
Americans, but the Americans were braver soldiers, and they had some
fine guns, which could be quickly moved to any part of the field. While
conducting the movement of these guns, Major Ringgold, a very brave and
skilful officer, was shot through both thighs and fell to the ground.
To add to his sufferings, his horse fell on him. He was taken off the
field, and died, after enduring great pains for two or three days. The
battle was chiefly fought with the artillery. But at one time, about
one thousand Mexican lancers moved forward to attack the Americans.
This splendid looking body of cavalry, however, was driven back by
the dreadful fire from the American guns, and the whole Mexican army
retreated. General Taylor and his brave soldiers slept upon the field
of battle.

[Illustration: REPULSE OF CAVALRY.]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: MAY’S CHARGE.]

BATTLE OF RESACA DE LA PALMA.


The next day after the battle of Palo Alto, General Taylor moved
forward towards Fort Polk. He could hear the sound of the bombardment,
and he was anxious to relieve the small garrison he had left in the
fort. He soon came up with the Mexicans again. They had received more
troops and had taken a strong position. It was a place called Resaca
de la Palma, or the Palm Ravine. General Taylor did not hesitate to
attack them. He and his men were confident that they could beat many
times their number of Mexicans. The victory at Palo Alto had assured
them of a victory wherever they should meet a foe. The flying artillery
was brought into service and poured quick and murderous discharges into
the Mexican ranks. Then Captain May, with his dragoons charged down the
ravine, through the bushes, and over the guns of the enemy, cutting
down all who came within reach of their sabres. General La Vega fell
into their hands. The Mexicans continued the fight even after they had
lost their cannon, but the Americans soon cleared the field at the
point of the bayonet, and then pushed on to Fort Polk.




[Illustration: SIEGE OF MONTEREY.]

[Illustration: GENERAL TAYLOR.]

SIEGE OF MONTEREY.


After General Taylor had taken possession of Matamoras, he waited for
reinforcements and then moved forward to attack Monterey. This city
was very strongly fortified by nature and art. The Saddle mountains
extended on three sides of it, while the other side was protected by a
high wall and strong works. Besides every house was so constructed of
stone as to be looked upon as a fortification. General Ampudia, with
about eleven thousand men formed its garrison. General Taylor’s army
only numbered six thousand men, yet he advanced, and commenced the
siege on the 21st of September. The Americans displayed the greatest
bravery in the various attacks, and at the close of the first day of
the siege, had taken the Bishop’s Palace and other strong outworks. The
next day was employed by the Americans in preparing for another grand
attack. On the 23d they assaulted the city on two sides, and their
batteries made terrible havoc among the Mexicans. The Texan rangers cut
their way through the houses with pickaxes, and the fighting in the
streets became dreadful and destructive. The Mexicans were collected in
the heart of the city, and to that point the Americans advanced. Night
put an end to the fighting, and the next morning, the Mexican general
proposed to surrender the city. Officers from both sides met and agreed
to certain terms. Then the Mexican army marched out of the city, and
the Americans entered and took possession of it. So it seemed that
nothing could stop the progress of General Taylor and his men.

[Illustration: STREET FIGHT AT MONTEREY.]




BATTLE OF BUENA VISTA.


The Mexicans, though beaten so often, did not lose their spirits. Their
great general, Santa Anna, soon collected an army of more than twenty
thousand men, and advanced towards Monterey. Now General Taylor’s
army was much reduced in numbers, and the most of his troops were
volunteers, who had never been in battle. But he resolved to await the
attack of the great Mexican army at a place called Buena Vista. On
the 22d of February, Santa Anna appeared and attacked the Americans;
but was repulsed. The great battle was fought on the next day.
It commenced early in the morning, and continued until night put an
end to the work of death. The Mexicans almost overwhelmed the little
army under General Taylor; but each man fought like a hero, and every
attack of the enemy was repulsed. Captain Bragg gave them plenty of
grape-shot. Three times during the day, was the American army saved by
the skill and effect with which the artillery was managed. At length
night came, and the exhausted troops sank down on the field. The next
morning, the Mexican army had retreated and could not be found. General
Taylor had therefore gained a victory over an army more than four times
as large as his own.

[Illustration: BRAGG, ASKING SUCCOR.]




[Illustration: DONIPHAN CROSSING THE DESERT OF DEATH.]

DONIPHAN’S MARCH.


The Americans, under the command of General Kearney, having taken
possession of New Mexico, Colonel Doniphan with a regiment of mounted
riflemen, was ordered to march to Chihuahua, and join General Wool.
The country between Santa Fe and Chihuahua was very little known, and
therefore when Colonel Doniphan set out he did not expect to encounter
the toils and dangers he afterwards met. A vast and dreary desert
was to be traversed, and a hostile people to be dealt with. Colonel
Doniphan began his march on the 17th of December, 1846, and soon
after reached the tract of country called by the Mexicans the “desert
of death,” where the bones of murdered men and famished animals were
strewn along the road, and where not a drop of water nor a blade
of grass met the eyes of the traveller. After passing through this
desert, the troops reached Bracito, where they repulsed an attack made
by the Mexicans. Doniphan was reinforced soon after, and marched for
Chihuahua. Near that place he again defeated the enemy. He remained six
weeks at Chihuahua, and seeing nothing of General Wool, marched to meet
General Taylor.




[Illustration: GENERAL PRICE AT TAOS.]

CAPTURE OF TAOS.


After Colonel Doniphan left Santa Fe, the Mexicans rose and killed
Governor Bent and five other Americans. Other murders followed. The
Mexicans collected a large army, and strongly fortified a village
called Pueblo de Taos. Colonel Price, with four hundred and fifty
men, after defeating a portion of the enemy, marched to attack Pueblo
de Taos, on the 4th of February. The greater part of the enemy were
posted in a stone church. Against this church, Colonel Price brought
his guns to play, but could not reduce it. An assault was repulsed. But
ladders being planted, the troops cut small holes with their axes and
threw fire into the church. A breach was then made in its walls, and a
storming party plunged through it to attack the enemy, who then fled.
The Americans pursued and killed all they overtook. About one hundred
and fifty Mexicans were killed. The next day, the survivors sued for
mercy, and the insurrection was at an end.




[Illustration: TRIUMPHAL ENTRY INTO PUEBLO DE LOS ANGELOS.]

CONQUEST OF CALIFORNIA.


Upon the breaking out of the war with Mexico, orders were sent to
Commodore Sloat, who commanded the squadron of United States vessels in
the Pacific, to take possession of all the ports of Upper California.
This was done, the people making but little resistance. Colonel
Fremont, the famous explorer of the far-west, then hoisted the flag of
the United States at Sonoma, a town in the northern part of California.
The Mexican governor fled. Colonel Fremont with one hundred and fifty
men, then hurried to join his force with that of Commodore Stockton,
who had taken command of the squadron. On the 13th of August, 1846, the
united forces entered the capital of California--Pueblo de los Angelos.
Thus the conquest of this valuable country was complete. The people
seemed to be very well satisfied with their conquerors. Commodore
Stockton issued a proclamation, announcing that he took possession of
the territory by authority of the government of the United States, and
offering security and protection to all who submit to that authority.




[Illustration: MAJOR-GENERAL WINFIELD SCOTT.]

SIEGE OF VERA CRUZ.


After the capture of Monterey, as the Mexicans did not seem disposed
for peace, the government of the United States determined to prosecute
a more decisive campaign. A large army was collected at Anton
Lizardo, and Major-General Winfield Scott took command of it. A
land and naval attack upon the city of Vera Cruz and the Castle of
San Juan Ulloa was fixed upon as the first object. The fleet, under
Commodore Conner, transported the army to a landing place selected
by General Scott, and the landing was effected on the 9th of March,
1847. Four thousand five hundred men were thrown upon the shore at
once, the Mexicans making no resistance. Very soon the rest of the
army was landed, and then they formed a great line around the city.
Then the great guns were brought ashore and a brisk fire opened by
the besiegers. The Mexicans returned the fire from the city and
castle. While the soldiers were doing this, a few small steam vessels
sailed up near to the castle and commenced firing upon it. This was a
bold exploit, and if the Mexicans had been equal to the Americans in
gunnery, they would have made the vessels pay for the boldness of their
commanders. A tremendous fire of cannon balls and bomb-shells was kept
up by the naval and land forces until the morning of the 26th of March,
when the inhabitants, who had suffered much, compelled the governor
to surrender the city and castle to General Scott. Commissioners were
appointed by the commanders of both armies, as is usual in such cases,
and terms of capitulation agreed upon. The Mexican troops were to
march out of the city, lay down their arms, and then march for the
interior, being prisoners of war on parole, and the city and castle,
with all their artillery and ammunition and public stores were to be
given up to the United States troops.

[Illustration: LANDING OF THE TROOPS.]

After the capitulation, General Worth was appointed military governor
of the city, and the troops had a short rest from the constant
exertions of the siege. During this siege, General Scott lost very few
men; but the enemy suffered a great deal. So that this fine city and
strong castle did not cost the captors much, while it gave them an
entrance to the great road leading to the city of Mexico.

[Illustration: THE MOSQUITO FLEET AT VERA CRUZ.]




[Illustration: BATTLE OF CERRO GORDO.]

[Illustration: GENERAL SANTA ANNA.]

BATTLE OF CERRO GORDO.


On the 8th of April, the van of General Scott’s army began its march
from Vera Cruz, for the interior of Mexico. The troops met with no
opposition until they approached a rocky pass called Cerro Gordo.
This place, which was very strong by nature, had been carefully
fortified by the Mexicans, under General Santa Anna. They thought that
General Scott’s men were not brave enough to venture to attack such a
strong position, defended by about fifteen thousand well furnished and
disciplined troops. But General Scott soon formed his plan of attack,
and on the 17th of April, ordered his divisions to take their appointed
positions. The next morning, the troops advanced to the attack, under
an awful fire from the Mexican batteries. Colonel Harney, with a
brigade of troops, rushed up the height of Cerro Gordo, on which the
principal battery was erected, and after a short struggle, drove the
enemy from their works. By two o’clock in the afternoon the victory
was complete. Five generals, many other officers, three thousand
soldiers, forty-three pieces of cannon, and a great quantity of small
arms were taken. Santa Anna, with the remnant of his army, fled towards
the city of Mexico, pursued by General Worth. Great numbers of the
Mexicans fell in the conflict and pursuit. General Scott lost about two
hundred and fifty men. Among the prisoners was the brave General La
Vega, who had been captured before at Resaca de la Palma. If all the
Mexican generals had been equal to La Vega, General Scott would have
had much harder fighting at Cerro Gordo.




[Illustration: RILEY’S CHARGE AT CONTRERAS.]

STORMING OF CONTRERAS.


The defeat of the Mexicans at Cerro Gordo opened the road for the
United States troops as far as the city of Puebla, at which place
General Scott was compelled to halt to refresh his men, and wait for
reinforcements. On the 7th of August, he began his march for the
capital. General Santa Anna had fortified nearly every available place
to check General Scott’s progress, and it was necessary that some of
the strong positions should be taken before he could proceed. One of
these was Contreras, defended by General Valencia, with a great body
of troops and twenty-two cannon. A detachment from General Scott’s
army attacked this place on the 19th of August, but could not withstand
the tremendous fire of the enemy. The next morning, the detachment,
which was commanded by General Smith, having gained a road in the
rear of the works, advanced to the assault. Colonel Riley headed the
storming party, rushed up to the works under a heavy fire, and after
a short struggle captured the cannon and drove the enemy before him.
General Shields cut off the retreat, and whole companies were forced to
surrender. Thus another complete triumph was gained by the Americans.




[Illustration: SHIELD’S CHARGE AT CHURUBUSCO.]

STORMING OF CHURUBUSCO.


By the capture of Contreras, the Mexicans were forced to concentrate
at Churubusco, which was still more strongly fortified than Contreras.
General Scott brought his whole army to the attack upon Churubusco,
and never did men behave with more valor and heroism. The fire of
the Mexicans was tremendous, and the Americans suffered much from
it. But post after post was carried, and the enemy found that their
superior numbers could not withstand the onset. General Worth stormed
the bridge, which was the strongest part of the works, while General
Twiggs brought his artillery to bear on a convent, which, however,
held out until General Twiggs was reinforced, when it surrendered. In
the meantime, General Shields, with two brigades, encountered about
four thousand Mexican infantry, whose flanks were protected by three
thousand cavalry, and after a severe struggle defeated them. The enemy
were routed in every part of the field, and pursued nearly to the gates
of Mexico. This was the most glorious day’s work the American army had
yet performed.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF MOLINO DEL REY.]

[Illustration: GENERAL SCOTT.]

CAPTURE OF MOLINO DEL REY.


Santa Anna saved the capital from immediate assault after the battle of
Churubusco, by procuring an armistice for peace negotiations. His real
object was to gain time to prepare munitions of war and strengthen
the defences of the city. General Scott discovered this, and put an
end to the armistice. He then resolved to attempt the capture of
Molino del Rey, a strongly fortified and garrisoned foundry. General
Worth, with three thousand one hundred and fifty men, was detached for
this service. General Worth was ignorant of the great strength of the
works, but he made skilful disposition and was determined to succeed.
There were three assaulting columns. The first was to assail Molino
del Rey, covered by the fire of some heavy artillery. The centre was
to consist of five hundred picked men, commanded by Major Wright. The
third column was commanded by Colonel M’Intosh, and consisted of
the second brigade, supported by Duncan’s artillery. A strong body of
troops were held in reserve. On the morning of the 8th of September,
the columns advanced to the assault, a tremendous fire from the
batteries having shaken the walls of the enemy’s works. The central
position was carried after a bloody struggle, in which Major Wright
and one half his force were either killed or wounded. The Mexicans
had masked batteries, which the Americans could not see till they
were within range of them. On the right of the field, the assailants
were completely successful, carrying the works, and slaughtering the
enemy without mercy. On the left Duncan kept up a heavy fire upon the
stone foundry, called Casa Mata. The assault was here repulsed; but
Duncan’s artillery restored the fortune of the contest, and compelled
the Mexicans to evacuate the foundry, even while they were playing
triumphant music for victory. Thus General Worth was victorious in
every part of the field, and the enemy were in flight. But the victory
was purchased by the loss of one half of the division. The loss of the
Mexicans in killed, wounded and prisoners was immense.

[Illustration: DUNCAN, AT MOLINO DEL REY.]




[Illustration: CANNONADE AND BOMBARDMENT OF CHAPULTEPEC.]

[Illustration]

STORMING OF CHAPULTEPEC.


By the capture of Molino del Rey, and the adjacent works, the castle
of Chapultepec was exposed to attack upon two sides, and General
Scott hastened to form his plan for the storming of it and the gates
of the capital. On the 12th of September, the batteries opened upon
the castle, and with such effect that Santa Anna was prevented from
throwing reinforcements into it. The Mexicans returned the fire, but
as they were not equal to the Americans in gunnery, they did very
little damage. On the 13th, the assault was made. General Quitman,
with one division, advanced upon the northeast side, while General
Pillow, with another division, assailed the height on the west. The
castle was garrisoned by picked troops, well supplied with artillery,
and commanded by the veteran, General Bravo. A determined defence
was therefore expected, and the Americans nerved themselves for it.
Pillow’s troops dashed up the rocky height amid a heavy and
destructive fire from the enemy, and so rapid was the assault that the
Mexicans were driven from post to post, until they had no chance to
fire their mines. General Pillow fell, severely wounded, and General
Cadwalader assumed the command of his division. Ladders were prepared,
the walls of the castle mounted, and the American flag planted upon
them. In the meantime, General Quitman advanced upon the opposite side,
defeated a large detachment of the enemy, and forced his way up the
height, with a rapidity and valor equal to that of the other division.
A portion of his troops arrived in time to storm the walls, and enter
side by side with Pillow’s troops. The Mexicans fought bravely,
even after the Americans had entered the fort. Few of them asked for
quarter, and fewer obtained it; as the victors were exasperated at the
cruelties of the Mexicans at Molino del Rey. A great many prisoners
were taken, and among others, General Bravo. Thus this fine castle,
which the Mexicans had looked upon as impregnable, fell into the hands
of the troops, whose progress no obstacle could check.

[Illustration: STORMING OF CHAPULTEPEC.]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: QUITMAN, AT THE BELEN GATE.]

CAPTURE OF THE CITY OF MEXICO.


The Americans now advanced to attack the strong defences of the
capital. By General Scott’s plan, General Twiggs kept up a heavy fire
upon the southern part of the city, to divert the attention of the
enemy, while General Worth advanced to attack the San Cosmo gate, and
General Quitman the Belen gate. The troops of these divisions were
exposed to a tremendous and destructive fire from batteries placed
along the roads and at the gates. But the men now seemed insensible to
danger, and pressed on with a valor that never was surpassed. Many
valuable officers fell at their head, and this excited a spirit of
revenge among the troops, which led them to give but little quarter to
the enemy. By night-fall, both gates were carried, and the conquerors
had gained a foothold in the city. The next morning, while General
Scott was preparing to complete the work, the government surrendered.
The Mexican army had fled from the city. On the 14th of September, the
Americans entered Mexico in triumph.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: ATTACK AT THE NATIONAL BRIDGE.]

DEFEAT OF THE MEXICANS AT THE NATIONAL BRIDGE.


The first affair in which General Cadwalader distinguished himself in
Mexico was a skirmish at the National Bridge, during his march to join
Scott at Puebla. Colonel M’Intosh had started with a train for the
interior; but being attacked by an overpowering force of the enemy,
had been forced to await the arrival of Cadwalader, who, hearing of
his danger, hurried up, with eight hundred men to his succor. On
approaching the National Bridge, Cadwalader, at the head of the united
forces, seized some heights which the enemy had previously occupied.
He was here attacked by a strong force, but made good his defence,
charging the Mexicans incessantly, until their strength was broken,
when the bridge was passed in safety. In this action the foe lost one
hundred in killed and wounded: Cadwalader about fifty. This victory was
won principally by artillery, a species of force with which Cadwalader
was perfectly familiar.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: GENERAL PIERCE, ENTERING PUEBLA.]

GENERAL PIERCE.


General Franklin Pierce was among the bravest of the brave who
fought during the Mexican war. He took command of a reinforcement of
twenty-four hundred men, at Vera Cruz, shortly after the battle of
Cerro Gordo, and set out to join General Scott, who was waiting at the
city of Puebla for more troops. At the National Bridge, he was attacked
by a large body of Mexicans, and narrowly escaped being killed, a
ball passing through his hat. He succeeded, however, in defeating the
enemy, and inflicting upon them a heavy loss in men. He then pushed
on, and met with no interruption till he arrived at Puebla. After his
arrival, the commander-in-chief completed his arrangements and set out
for the capital. In the first attack upon Contreras, General Pierce was
wounded in the knee, while leading his brigade against the enemy. But
he kept the field until midnight. The next day he joined the brigade,
and pressed forward among the most heroic. He had dismounted to leap a
ditch, forgetting his wound, when he fainted and fell directly in the
line of the enemy’s fire. His escape from death was a miracle.




[Illustration: GENERAL LANE, AT ATLIXCO.]

BATTLE OF ATLIXCO.


Early in October, 1847, General Joseph Lane, with about two thousand
five hundred men, and five pieces of artillery, marched from Vera Cruz
to reinforce the army of General Scott. Near a town called Huamantla,
he encountered and defeated a large body of Mexican troops, who
attempted to check his progress. Pressing forward, he met parties of
Mexicans along the road several miles from Atlixco. A running fight
ensued, in which the American cavalry was chiefly engaged. At length
the Mexican detachments were driven into the town. Night came on, and
General Lane posted his artillery on a hill near the city, and opened a
heavy, well-aimed, and very rapid fire. After firing for three quarters
of an hour, the batteries of the enemy were silenced; and a portion of
General Lane’s troops were ordered to advance cautiously into the town.
They were met by the authorities, who entreated that the town might
be spared. This victory completely broke up the guerilla bands in the
vicinity of Atlixco.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: BATTLE OF BRACITO.]

BATTLE OF BRACITO.


We have already given a slight outline of the famous expedition of
Colonel Doniphan. We will now notice some of the exploits of his little
army.

The battle of Bracito was the first engagement fought by the mounted
troops, under the command of Colonel Doniphan. It occurred on Christmas
day, 1847. Colonel Doniphan’s men had marched to within a short
distance of the town of El Paso, and had encamped near a bend in the
Bracito river. The Mexicans, in great force, came upon them, while they
were in search of wood and water. A quick rally was made, and the
Americans drew up on foot to receive the charge of the enemy’s cavalry.
The Mexicans displayed a black flag, with skull and cross-bones worked
upon it, and said they would give no quarter nor ask it. A heavy shower
of balls from the rifles of the Americans caused the cavalry to wheel
and retreat in confusion. A small party of the Americans then rushed up
to the enemy’s line, and captured their cannon, dragging it into the
American line. This daring and desperate act completely astonished the
Mexicans, and they soon after made a hurried retreat, having lost about
two hundred men. Colonel Doniphan lost very few men.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF SACRAMENTO.]

BATTLE OF SACRAMENTO.


Colonel Doniphan’s force was increased to a thousand men, with four
pieces of artillery, soon after his arrival at El Paso. Continuing his
march towards Chihuahua, he reached the valley of the Sacramento. The
Mexicans had taken a strong position on the banks of the Sacramento,
and it was well fortified. Colonel Doniphan saw that the only chance
of fighting them at all upon even ground was to get possession of the
high tableland between the Seco and Sacramento rivers. Accordingly a
small force was directed to advance for that purpose. This gallant
band stormed the intrenchments and gained the tableland, where the
whole American army was drawn up for battle. The Mexicans opened a
heavy fire, and it was returned with more effect by Captain Weightman’s
artillery. Then the troops were ordered to storm the works. A gallant
charge was made, amid a tremendous fire, and, after a three hour’s
fight, the enemy were completely defeated. The Mexicans lost about
three hundred men, ten pieces of artillery, and a large quantity of
ammunition. This battle was justly considered one of the most brilliant
that was fought during the war. It raised the fame of Colonel Doniphan
and his brave band of warriors to a very high point in public esteem.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF PASQUAL.]

BATTLE OF SAN PASQUAL.


Soon after the Americans took possession of New Mexico, General
Kearney, with only one hundred dragoons for an escort, began a march
through an unknown and hostile country for Upper California. On the 5th
of December, having reached the frontier settlements of that territory,
he was met by Captain Gillespie, with a party of riflemen, who had
been sent out to give him information of an insurrection that had
occurred in California. Captain Gillespie informed General Kearney that
an armed party of Californians was encamped at San Pasqual, and the
general immediately resolved to attack them. At daybreak, on the 6th of
December, he encountered the enemy, and a well-fought action ensued.
The California lancers committed some havoc among the Americans, but a
furious charge from the dragoons compelled them to retreat. The fight,
however, was renewed, when the enemy saw the small force that pursued
them, and they were not completely defeated until about one-third of
the Americans were killed or wounded. The loss of the Californians was
also heavy. The subsequent junction of Commodore Stockton and his brave
band of sailors with the force of General Kearney, decided the conquest
of California.




[Illustration: SIEGE OF MONTEREY.]

CAPTURE OF MONTEREY, IN UPPER CALIFORNIA.


In June, 1846, Commodore Sloat having received information that the
Mexicans had crossed the Rio Grande, determined to take possession
of the principal ports of Upper California. He sailed to Monterey in
the frigate Savannah, and was there joined by the Cyanne and Levant,
vessels of war. Having examined the defences of the small town, and
completed the arrangements for capturing it, the commodore sent Captain
Mervine to demand its surrender. The Mexican commandant replied that
he was not authorized to surrender the town, and referred Commodore
Sloat to Governor Castro. Captain Mervine then landed two hundred
and fifty seamen and marines, hoisted the star-spangled banner amid
cheers from the troops and bystanders, and a national salute from the
squadron. Commodore Sloat then issued a proclamation, announcing that
war existed between the United States and Mexico, and the arms of the
United States would be carried throughout California. The conquest
was subsequently completed as just related, by the great exertions of
Commodore Stockton, who succeeded Sloat, and landed men from his fleet,
marched to the relief of Kearney, fought pitched battles with the
enemy, and never left the affair until the conquest of the country was
fully effected.




[Illustration: BATTLE OF SAN GABRIEL.]

BATTLE OF SAN GABRIEL.


General Kearney with his small, and almost worn-out force, reached San
Diego just in time to join Commodore Stockton in carrying out a plan
for reducing the Californians to submission. On the 29th of December,
the little army, consisting of about six hundred men--the greater part
of them being seamen, started from San Diego, to march toward Puebla
de los Angelos, the capital and chief city of California. They had
proceeded about one hundred and ten miles toward the Rio San Gabriel,
when they found about six hundred mounted men, with four pieces of
artillery, drawn up to dispute the passage of the river. On the 8th
of January, 1847, the necessary arrangements having been made, the
Americans waded across the river, reserved their fire until they
reached the opposite bank, repelled a charge of the enemy, and then
charged them in gallant style. After an action of an hour and a half,
the enemy were driven from the field, on which the conquerors encamped
for the night. The loss of the Californians was severe.

This battle, fought by the seamen and marines of Commodore Stockton, is
justly regarded as one of the most extraordinary exploits of the whole
Mexican war, which, as we have seen, abounded in all sorts of romantic
and heroic achievements.




[Illustration: GENERAL SHIELDS AT CERRO GORDO.]

GENERAL SHIELDS AT CERRO GORDO.


General James Shields distinguished himself in several battles during
the Mexican war, and was severely wounded upon two occasions. In the
great battle of Cerro Gordo, General Shields, with his brigade of
volunteers, was directed to storm the height west of the principal
battery of the Mexicans, which commanded the Jalapa road. The order was
promptly and bravely executed. The volunteers advanced up the height
with all the steadiness and courage of veterans, and carrying the
height drove the enemy along the Jalapa road. As General Shields was
advancing with his men, he was shot through the lungs. This paralyzed
him, and he was carried off the field. The wound was at first thought
to be mortal, but it happily proved to be otherwise. The general
recovered and joined the army in time to share in the glory of the
battles of Contreras, Churubusco, and the Garitas of Mexico.

General Shields is something more than a mere warrior. After the
conclusion of the war, we find him assisting in the deliberation of
the highest legislative body in the country, the senate of the United
States. He is not a native of our country, but like the brave General
Montgomery, who fell at the storming of Quebec, he is one of our
adopted citizens. He was born in Ireland.




[Illustration: GENERAL SCOTT, ENTERING THE CITY OF MEXICO.]

THE AMERICAN ARMY IN THE CAPITAL.


After the flag of the United States had been planted upon the National
Palace of the capital, by General Quitman, General Scott, with the main
army, entered the city. The officers were dressed in full uniform,
the military bands poured forth the “Star-Spangled Banner,” and “Hail
Columbia,” and every thing was arranged in such a manner as to gratify
the toil-worn, but triumphant troops.

The Mexicans were now disposed to listen to the overtures of peace made
by the commissioner, Mr. N. P. Trist. They appointed commissioners,
who met Mr. Trist, at Guadalupe Hidalgo. After considerable discussion,
a treaty of peace was agreed upon, by which New Mexico, Upper
California, and the territory between the Nueces and Rio Grande were
ceded to the United States. This treaty was ratified by the two
governments, and in the spring of 1848, the American army evacuated
Mexico.

The Mexican war thus brought to a close forms one of the most brilliant
epochs in the military history of our country. It was signalized by
astonishing displays of bravery and military skill; and added to our
union, several states, among which is California, the richest gold
region in the world.




Transcriber’s Notes.

1. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
errors.

2. Some of the illustrations have been moved to the nearest paragraph
break.

3. The officers’ portraits on pages 91, 112, 120, and 135 have been
identified on the internet. Their names have been added as captions
to their respective portraits.
